Functional programming (#412)
Codecademy/docs: content/general/concepts/what-is-functional-programming/what-is-functional-programming.md

---

> Title: 'Functional Progtamming'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: 'Functional Programming'
```

> Description: 'Functional Programming (FP) is a declarative software development paradigm which encourages constructing programs by composing pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements. The functions are isolated and independent of the state of the application. In Functional Programming, dependencies such as variables or objects needed for a function, are always declared explicitly by passing them into the function as arguments. Any operation inside the function is therefore binded to the arguments passed, instead of depending on global objects or variables. This makes the function easier to test and debug, and allows for more predictability, reusability and stability when altering and refactoring code.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'Encourages programming with pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements.'
```

For Docs entries, per the [entry template](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/docs/main/documentation/entry-template.md), can we keep the length of the meta-`Description` within (ideally) 150 characters

Author: I see, makes sense! Actually I used the existing entry on OOP as some guidance to write this one, and the description was quite lengthy there, but should have checked the template better!

> Subjects:
> - 'Computer Science'
> - 'Web Development'
> - 'Data Science'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subjects:
- 'Code Foundations'
- 'Computer Science'
- 'Web Development'
```

> Tags:
> - 'Function Composition'
> - 'Functions'
> - 'Pure Functions'
> - 'Recursion'
> - 'Referential Transparency'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tags:
- 'Functions'
- 'Pure Functions'
- 'Recursion'
```

> CatalogContent:
> - 'paths/code-foundations'
> - 'paths/computer-science'
> - 'paths/data-science'
> - 'paths/front-end-engineer-career-path'
> - 'paths/back-end-engineer-career-path'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CatalogContent:
- 'learn-to-code'
- 'paths/code-foundations'
```

Let's only use 2 links for `CatalogContent`:

- One `learn-to` (free) slug
- One Pro `paths/` slug.

---

_Functional Programming_ (FP) is a declarative software development paradigm which encourages constructing programs by composing pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements. The functions are isolated and independent of the state of the application. 

In Functional Programming, dependencies such as variables or objects needed for a function, are always declared explicitly by passing them into the function as arguments. Any operation inside the function is therefore binded to the arguments passed, instead of depending on global objects or variables. This makes the function easier to test and debug, and allows for more predictability, reusability and stability when altering and refactoring code.

## Core Principles of FP

> - The functional approach to programming means treating all functions as **First-class entities**: functions can be assigned to a variable, passed as arguments of another function, and returned from other functions, just as any other data type can. Higher-order functions are a type of first-class functions, as they can take functions as arguments, return a function, or both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### First-class-entitles
In FP, functions are considered to be first-class entities. This means that functions can be:

- Assigned to a variable.
- Passed as arguments into other functions
- Returned from other functions, just as any other data type can. 

Higher-order functions are a type of first-class functions, as they can take functions as arguments and/or return a function.
```

> - ***Pure functions*** are the bread and butter of Functional Programming. A pure function is a function that always produces the same output for the same set of inputs and that does not cause any side effects (i.e. no external impact in the application state besides the return value and no data alteration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pure Functions
Pure functions are the bread and butter of FP. They are functions that always produce the same output for the same set of inputs and that do not cause any side effects. Nothing in the application state is impacted (other than the return value of the pure functions) and no data alteration.
```

> - That latter property of pure functions can further be defined as **immutability**: not altering variables or objects outside of the function, but instead creating new ones and returning them if need be from the function. Generally speaking, FP is about avoiding _shared mutable state_ - which is when different parts of the program are able to access data that can be modified and that exist in a shared scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

That latter property of pure functions can further be defined as*immutability**. This means that variables or objects outside of the function are unaffected. Instead, copies are created and returned from the function if needed. 

Generally speaking, FP is about avoiding a shared mutable state, which is when different parts of the program are able to access data that can be modified and that exist in a shared scope.
```

> - Pure functions also provide what is known as **referential transparency**. An expression is referentially transparent if it can be replaced with its returned value without changing the program's behavior. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Referential Transparency
Pure functions also provide what is known as referential transparency. An expression is referentially transparent if it can be replaced with its returned value without changing the program's behavior. 
```

Can we expand on this a bit? Do we mean "Pure functions" provide this transparency or "FP"?

Author: According to my research on this, pure functions are necessarily referentially transparent, because purity is necessary to achieve referential transparency. So in fact, I think this paragraph might better fit under the same subsection as Pure functions.

> - **Function composition** is widely used in FP to perform computation or produce new functions. The process of composing functions can be described by chaining two or more function calls: once the first function is called, its return value is passed to a second function as an argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Function Composition
The process of composing functions can be described by chaining two or more function calls: once the first function is called, its return value is passed to a second function as an argument.
```

I think it would be good to provide a code snippet as an example of this concept. The same goes for most of what's covered in this entry (pure functions, referential transparency, and recursion come to mind).

> - In FP, iteration is implemented through **recursion** as opposed to for and while loops. Recursive functions repeatedly call themselves, until a specified condition is met. This technique allows to break down a problem into smaller pieces and contributes to the removing of side effects, as well as making the code more expressive and readable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recursive Functions
In FP, iteration is implemented through recursion as opposed to `for` and `while` loops. Recursive functions repeatedly call themselves, until a specified base case is met. Conceptually, this technique breaks down a problem into smaller pieces and contributes to the removal of side effects, as well as improving readability.
```

---
Title: 'Functional Programming'
Description: 'Encourages programming with pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code foundations'
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Web Development'
Tags:
  - 'Functions'
  - 'Recursion'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-to-code'
  - 'paths/code-foundations'
---

> _Functional Programming_ (FP) is a declarative software development paradigm which encourages constructing programs by composing pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements. The functions are isolated and independent of the state of the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Functional Programming (FP) is a declarative software development paradigm that encourages constructing programs by composing pure functions and evaluating expressions instead of statements. The functions are isolated and independent of the state of the application.
```

In FP, dependencies such as variables or objects needed for a function, are always declared explicitly by passing them into the function as arguments. Any operation inside the function is therefore bound to the arguments passed, instead of depending on global objects or variables. This makes the function:

- Suitable for testing and debugging.
- Predictable, reusable, and stable when refactoring code.

> FP helps make code more modular, readable and easier to reason about in general.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FP helps make code more modular, readable, and easier to reason about in general.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just include that FP makes code more modular and understandable. "Readable" and "reason about in general" can be summed up into understandable.

## Core Principles of FP

> 

Reviewer 2: Could we add a small intro here about the core principles of FP before going into each one?

### First-class entities

In FP, functions are considered to be first-class entities. This means that functions can be:

- Assigned to a variable
- Passed as arguments into other functions
- Returned from other functions, just as any other data type can.

Higher-order functions are a type of first-class functions, as they can take functions as arguments and/or return a function.

### Pure Functions

> Pure functions are the bread and butter of FP. They are functions that always produce the same output for the same set of inputs and that do not cause any side effects. Nothing in the application state is impacted (other than the return value of the pure functions) and no data is alterated. This aspect is known as referential transparency: pure functions can be replaced with their returned value without changing the program's behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pure functions are the bread and butter of FP. They are functions that always produce the same output for the same set of inputs and do not cause any side effects. The application state is not impacted apart from the return value of the pure functions and no data is altered. This aspect is known as referential transparency: pure functions can be replaced with their returned value without changing the behavior of a program.
```

Could we change how the second sentence is phrased by using less definitive language?

### Immutability

> That latter property of pure functions can further be defined as _immutability_. This means that variables or objects outside of the function are unaffected. Instead, copies are created and returned from the function if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That latter property of pure functions can further be defined as immutability. This means that variables or objects outside of the function are unaffected. Instead, copies are created and returned from the function if needed.
```

Generally speaking, FP is about avoiding a shared mutable state, which is when different parts of the program are able to access data that can be modified and that exist in a shared scope.

### Function Composition

> The process of composing functions can be described by chaining two or more function calls: once the first function is called, its return value is passed to a second function as an argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process of composing functions can be described by chaining two or more function calls; once the first function is called, its return value is passed to a second function as an argument.
```

### Recursive Functions

> In FP, iteration is implemented through recursion as opposed to `for` and `while` loops. Recursive functions repeatedly call themselves, until a specified base case is met. Conceptually, this technique breaks down a problem into smaller pieces and contributes to the removal of side effects, as well as improving readability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In FP, iteration is implemented through recursion as opposed to `for` and `while` loops. Recursive functions repeatedly call themselves until a specified base case is met. Conceptually, this technique breaks down a problem into smaller pieces, contributes to the removal of side effects, and improves readability.
```
